No other sovereign ruler had ever accomplished the feat of circling the globe, but Kalākaua, the last king of the Hawaiian islands, had previously set other records.[1] He was the first reigning monarch to visit America during his 1874 visit to Washington, D.C. for negotiations of the Reciprocity Treaty of 1875. The state dinner in his honor hosted by President Ulysses S. Grant was the first White House state dinner ever given.[2] According to the personal writings of Queen Dowager Emma, a political opponent of his,[FN 1] Kalākaua supposedly had the intention in 1874 of making a world tour "for his personal gratification and vanity", by crossing Europe and going eastward through to the Pacific, although it never materialized.[3]

The islands were officially the Kingdom of Hawaii but had generally been known as the Sandwich Islands since Captain James Cook visited in 1778. The estimated population of Native Hawaiians when Cook arrived was 800,000. With the arrival of whaling ships and missionaries in the early 19th century, the Native Hawaiians were exposed to diseases for which they had no immunity and began dying in large numbers. The official 1878 census showed only 44,088 individuals who claimed Hawaiian ethnicity.[4][5] The sugar plantation work force in the islands, and the dwindling population of the Hawaiian race had been Kalākaua's ongoing concerns. On December 24, 1880, he signed an act of the legislative assembly acknowledging corruption in the immigration system and authorizing Minister of the Interior Henry A. P. Carter to take charge of licensing immigration brokers.[6]

Immediately following the signing of the legislation, he visited the each major island in the kingdom for a personal look at how the reciprocity treaty had affected his people. In a speech before an audience of Native Hawaiians at a Congregational church on Kauai, Kalākaua related his concerns, "I will speak to you of one of our great questions, which is the supply of people, not only to meet the requirements of all our industries but to assist in the increase of a Hawaiian population."[7] In order to save the declining population of the Hawaiian race from completely dying out, he wanted to bring in Austronesian immigrants from Asia-Pacific nations.[1] Prior labor immigration had been mostly unmarried men, and he hoped to attract unmarried women as potential wives for them, as well bringing in family groups.[7]

Kalākaua appointed William Nevins Armstrong as Attorney General in December. Armstrong had been born to Presbyterian missionaries Clarissa and Richard Armstrong in Lahaina. He had known Kalākaua since their early days at the Chiefs Children's School on Maui where he and classmate Charles Hastings Judd became friends with the future king.[8] He subsequently graduated from Yale University and became a successful lawyer before returning to Hawaii.[9] Judd had been on Kalākaua's staff since he was elected king, soon after becoming part of his Privy Council, as well as being his chamberlain and private secretary.[10]

Years later Armstrong remembered the invitation to join the tour as having arisen in a casual conversation, during which he did not believe the king was serious.[11] He realized the proposed tour was not just idle conversation when the king informed his Cabinet of his plans and chose Armstrong, Judd, and his personal cook Robert von Oelhoffen as his only traveling companions.[12] At a state dinner held by Kalākaua and his ministers a week before departure, Armstrong spoke of their youthful dreams of sailing around the world finally being brought to fruition.[13]

Minister of the Interior Carter issued a Bureau of Immigration Ordinance on January 14, 1881, stipulating the terms and conditions under which new immigrants would be allowed into the islands.[14] On January 17, Kalākaua appointed Armstrong as Royal Commissioner of Immigration; Carter became acting Attorney General until their return.[15] Armstrong had instructions to return with a feasibility study indicating which nations were likely to provide "a desirable population"[16] for the Hawaiian labor force.[16] William L. Green, Minister of Foreign Affairs, followed up with a communique to Hawaii's consulates stating the goals for the tour.[17]

Kalākaua's sister and heir-apparent Liliuokalani was to act as Regent during his absence.[18] She devoted a chapter of her 1898 book Hawaii's Story to her brother's tour. Her assertion was that the "missionary party" tried to exert its control by insisting that she only be allowed to be in charge of a temporary council and that all decisions in the king's absence were to be made by the entire council. She balked at the suggestion and demanded that her regency have full royal power; he agreed.[19]

Farewell receptions were held for the king by the Catholic and Protestant communities in Honolulu on the eve of his departure. John Makini Kapena, a member of the House of Nobles, spoke to the assembled well-wishers gathered at Kawaiahao Church, stating "... The great nations now look with respect on this little Kingdom and will have still more, when they see our King traveling among them for information to benefit his people, Let us all pray every day for the King's health, and safe return to his people." Throughout the night, his subjects serenaded him with traditional oli (chants) and mele (songs) outside the palace.[20]

Kalākaua's Masonic ties as Master of Lodge Le Progres de L'Oceanie would give him a global brotherhood in his travels.[21] He and his chosen companions boarded the steamship City of Sydney at 6:30 a.m., January 20, bound for San Francisco. As the king made his way onto the ship, many in the crowd at the dock reached out to touch him.[14] Major George W. Macfarlane, his aide-de-camp, would accompany them as far as California. The king traveled as Aliʻi Kalākaua and as Prince Kalākaua, as opposed to being in his capacity as head of state. The intent was to give the impression of a personal vacation, thereby avoiding the large costly retinue required for official business. The Royal Hawaiian Band, the Hawaiian army, and a large contingent of well-wishers bid them farewell as the City of Sydney sailed out.[22][23]